The Major Biomes


This map shows the locations of the world's major land biomes. Other parts of Earth's surface are classified as mountains or ice caps. Each biome has a characteristic climate and community of organisms.

Ecologists recognize at least ten different biomes. The world’s major land biomes include tropical rain forest, tropical dry forest, tropical savanna, desert, temperate grassland, temperate woodland and shrubland, temperate forest, northwestern coniferous forest, boreal forest, and tundra. Each of these biomes is defined by a unique set of abiotic factors – particularly climate – and has a characteristic ecological community. The map shows the natural geographic distribution of these major biomes. Be aware, however; that this is just one of many different systems that are used to classify biomes. The map does not take into account changes made by human activity.

The boundaries between the biomes may appear to be sharp on the map. On the ground, however, there are often transitional areas between biomes. In these transitional areas, one biome's plants and animals gradually become less frequent, while the organisms characteristic of the adjacent biome become more frequent. In addition, the community structure of a particular biome will differ slightly, depending on location and elevation above sea level. For this survey, you will study an example of each major biome from a specific location and elevation. You will begin in the tropics and finish at the poles.


Use the packet, your notes, and online resources if need to complete the assignment 
Can be completed alone or in a group of two or three students


Tropical RainForest

Tropical rain forests are
home to more species than
all other land biomes combined.
The leafy tops of tall
trees – extending up to 70
meters above the forest
floor – form a dense covering
called a canopy. In the
shade below the canopy, a
second layer of shorter
trees and vines forms an
understory. Organic matter
that falls to the forest floor
quickly decomposes and
the nutrients are recycled.






• Abiotic factors: hot and wet year-round; thin, nutrient-poor soils

• Dominant plants:   
         s; ferns; large woody vines and climbing plants; orchids and bromeliads

• Dominant wildlife: herbivores such as sloths, tapirs, and capybaras; predators such as jaguars; anteaters; monkeys; birds such as toucans, parrots, and parakeets; insects such as butterflies, ants, and beetles; piranhas and other freshwater fishes; reptiles such as frogs, caymans, boa constrictors, and anacondas

• Geographic distribution: parts of South and Central America, Southeast Asia, parts of Africa, southern India, and northeastern Australia








Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Tropical Rainforest



World Location: Amazon Basin



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): 25-30 celsius, no seasonal variation, 200-400 cm of rainfall annually 






Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Nutrient-poor soil, high-humidity







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Orchids
Grow on trees to access sunlight


Lianas
Climb trees to reach sunlight


Bromeliads
store water in leaves


Kapok Trees
Develop buttress roots to stabilize in shallow, nutrient-poor soil


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Jaguar
Spotted coat camouflages with dappled sunlight on the forest floor


Sloth
Moves slowly to conserve energy and avoid predators


Poison Dart Frog
Bright colors signal toxicity, deterring predators


Toucan
Large bill helps reach fruit on thin branches and regulates heat,






Tropical Dry Forest

Tropical dry forests grow in
places where rainfall is
highly seasonal rather than
year-round. During the dry
season, nearly all the trees
drop their leaves to conserve
water. A tree that
sheds its leaves during a
particular season each year
is called deciduous.











• Abiotic factors: generally warm year-round; alternating wet and dry seasons; rich soils subject to erosion

• Dominant plants: tall, deciduous trees that form a dense canopy during the wet season; drought-tolerant orchids and bromeliads; aloes and other succulents

• Dominant wildlife: tigers; monkeys; herbivores such as elephants, Indian rhinoceros, hog deer; birds such as great pied hornbill, pied harrier, and spot-billed pelican; insects such as termites; reptiles such as snakes and monitor lizards

• Geographic distribution: parts of Africa, South and Central America, Mexico,
India, Australia, and tropical islands








Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Desert



World Location: Sahara Desert



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): Extreme heat (up to 50 celsius) in the day, cold nights, less than 25 cm of rainfall annually






Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Sandy Soil, low vegetation







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Cactus
Stores water in stems


Sagebrush
Long roots to access water


Creosote Bush
Waxy coating to prevent water loss


Aloe Vera
Stores water in leaves and reduces evaporation through a waxy coating


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Fennec Fox
Large ears for heat dissipation


Camel
Stores fat in humps for energy


Kangaroo Rat
Produces concentrated urine to conserve water


Sidewinder Snake
Moves in a sideways motion to minimize contact with hot sand






Tropical Savanna

Receiving more seasonal
rainfall than deserts but
less than tropical dry
forests, tropical savannas,
or grasslands, are characterized
by a cover of grasses.
Savannas are spotted
with isolated trees and
small groves of trees and
shrubs. Compact soils, fairly
frequent fires, and the
action of large animals
such as rhinoceros prevent
some savanna areas from
turning into dry forest.







• Abiotic factors: warm temperatures; seasonal rainfall; compact soil; frequent fires set by lightning

• Dominant plants: tall, perennial grasses; sometimes drought-tolerant and fire-resistant trees or shrubs

• Dominant wildlife: predators such as lions, leopards, cheetahs, hyenas, and jackals; aardvarks; herbivores such as elephants, giraffes, antelopes, and zebras; baboons; birds such as eagles, ostriches, weaver birds, and storks; insects such as termites

• Geographic distribution: large parts of eastern Africa, southern Brazil, northern
Australia






Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Tundra



World Location: Arctic Regions



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): -30 celsius to 10 celsius, short summers, low precipitation






Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Permafrost, strong winds







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Mosses
Survive in cold and nutrient-poor soil by growing low to the ground


Arctic Willow
Small, low-growing to avoid wind damage and conserve heat


Lichens
Photosynthesize at low temperature and resist drying out.


Bearberry
Small leaves and low growth reduce water loss and heat exposure


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Polar Bear
Thick fur and fat insulate against cold temperature 


Arctic Fox 
Seasonal fur color provides camouflage


Caribou
Broad hooves help dig for food and traverse snow.


Snowy Owl
White feathers camouflage in snow and thick feathers provide insulation






Desert

All deserts are dry –- in
fact, a desert biome is
defined as having annual
precipitation of less than 25
centimeters. Beyond that,
deserts vary greatly,
depending on elevation and
latitude. Many undergo
extreme temperature
changes during the course
of a day, alternating
between hot and cold. The
organisms in this biome
can tolerate the extreme
conditions.







• Abiotic factors: low precipitation, variable temperatures; soils rich in minerals but poor in organic material

• Dominant plants: cacti and other succulents; creosote bush and other plants with short growth cycles 

• Dominant wildlife: predators such as mountain lions, gray foxes, and bobcats; herbivores such as mule deer, pronghorn antelope, desert bighorn sheep, and kangaroo rats; bats; birds such as owls, hawks, and roadrunners; insects such as ants, beetles, butterflies, flies, and wasps; reptiles such as tortoises, rattlesnakes, and lizards

• Geographic distribution: Africa, Asia, the Middle East, United States, Mexico,
South America and Australia




Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Savanna



World Location: Africa



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): 20-30 celsius, wet summers and dry winters seasons, 50-150 cm of annual rainfall






Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Poor soil due to leaching






Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Acacia Trees
Develop thorns to deter herbivores


Baobab Trees
Stores water in trunks to survive dry seasons


Grasses
Regrow quickly after grazing by herbivores
Elephant Grass
Grows tall to provide cover and thrive in warm conditions


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Lion 
Tan coat camouflages with dry grasslands for hunting


Giraffe
Long necks allow feeding on leaves of tall trees


Elephant
Large ears regulate body temperature


Cheetah
Lightweight body and long legs enable high-speed chases








Temperate Grassland

Characterized by a rich mix
of grasses and underlaid by
some of the world's most
fertile soils, temperate
grasslands – such as plains
and prairies – once covered
vast areas of the midwestern
United States. Since the
development of the steel
plow, however, most have
been converted to agricultural
fields. Periodic fires
and heavy grazing by large
herbivores maintain the
characteristic plant community.





• Abiotic factors: warm to hot summers; cold winters; moderate, seasonal precipitation; fertile soils; occasional fires

• Dominant plants: lush, perennial grasses and herbs; most are resistant to drought, fire, and cold

• Dominant wildlife: predators such as coyotes and badgers -- historically included wolves and grizzly bears; herbivores such as mule deer, pronghorn antelope, rabbits, prairie dogs, and introduced cattle -- historically included bison; birds such as hawks, owls, bobwhite, prairie chicken, mountain plover; reptiles such as snakes; insects such as ants and grasshoppers

• Geographic distribution: central Asia, North America, Australia, central Europe, and upland plateaus of South America






Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Temperate Forest



World Location: Europe



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): -30 celsius to 30 celsius, 75-100 cm of annual rainfall, 4 seasons






Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Fertile soil, moderate humidity







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Maple Trees
Lose leaves to conserve water in winter


Ferns
Grow in shade under tall trees


Mosses
Thrive in damp conditions


Wildflowers
Bloom early in spring before tree canopy blocks sunlight.


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Black Bear
Hibernates during winter to conserve energy.


Deer
Adapt to seasonal food availability by foraging different plants.
 
Squirrel
Stores nuts for winter when food is scarce.


Owl
Silent flight and sharp vision help it hunt at night.






Temperate Woodland
and Shrubland

This biome is characterized
by a semiarid climate and a
mix of shrub communities
and open woodlands. In the
open woodlands, large
areas of grasses and wildflowers
such as poppies are
interspersed with oak trees.
Communities that are dominated
by shrubs are also
known as chaparral. The
growth of dense, low plants
that contain flammable oils
makes fires a constant
threat.





• Abiotic factors: hot, dry summers; cool, moist winters; thin, nutrient-poor soils; periodic fires

• Dominant plants: woody evergreen shrubs with small, leathery leaves; fragrant, oily herbs that grow during winter and die in summer

• Dominant wildlife: predators such as coyotes, foxes, bobcats, and mountain lions; herbivores such as blacktailed deer, rabbits, squirrels, and mice; birds such as hawks, California quail, western scrub jay, warblers and other songbirds; reptiles such as lizards and snakes; butterflies; spiders

• Geographic distribution: western coasts of North and South America, areas around the Mediterranean Sea, South Africa, and Australia







Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Grasslands



World Location: Great Plains (USA)



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): -20 celsius to 30 celsius, 25-75 cm of rainfall annually, hot summers, cold winters
 





Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Deep, fertile soil







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Buffalo Grass
Drought-tolerant with deep roots.


Switchgrass
Flexible stems survive strong winds.


Coneflowers
Bright colors attract pollinators.


Milkweed
Produces toxins to deter herbivores.
 
Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Bison
Thick fur protects against cold winters.


Prairie Dog
Lives in burrows to escape predators and harsh weather.


Coyote
Adapts diet to available food.


Hawk
Sharp talons and excellent vision for hunting small mammals.






Temperate Forest

Temperate forests contain a
mixture of deciduous and
coniferous (koh-NIF-ur-us)
trees. Coniferous trees, or
conifers, produce seed-bearing
cones and most have
leaves shaped like needles.
These forests have cold
winters that halt plant
growth for several months.
In autumn, the deciduous
trees shed their leaves. In
the spring, small plants
burst out of the ground and
flower. Soils of temperate
forests are often rich in
humus (HYOO-mus), a
material formed from
decaying leaves and other
organic matter that makes the 
soil fertile.



• Abiotic factors: cold to moderate winters; warm summers; year-round precipitation; fertile soils

• Dominant plants: broadleaf deciduous trees; some conifers; flowering shrubs; herbs; a ground layer of mosses and ferns

• Dominant wildlife: Deer; black bears; bobcats; nut and acorn feeders, such as squirrels; omnivores such as raccoons and skunks; numerous songbirds; turkeys

• Geographic distribution: eastern United States; southeastern Canada; most of
Europe; and parts of Japan, China, and Australia






Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Taiga



World Location: Canada



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): -40 celsius to 20 celsius, short summers, 30-50 cm precipitation






Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Acidic soil, long winters







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Spruce Tree
Needle-like leaves reduce water loss


Pine Tree
Thick bark protects against cold and fire.


Moss
Grows on tree trunks to access limited light.


Berry Bushes
Attract animals to disperse seeds.


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Moose
Thick fur and large nostrils warm the air before breathing.


Wolverine
Strong claws help it dig through snow for prey.


Snowshoe Hare
Seasonal fur color changes for camouflage.


Lynx
Large paws act like snowshoes for walking on snow.
 




Northwestern
Coniferous Forest

Mild, moist air from the
Pacific Ocean provides
abundant rainfall to this
biome. The forest is made
up of a variety of conifers,
ranging from giant redwoods,
along the coast of
northern California. to
spruce, fir, and hemlock
farther north. Moss often
covers tree trunks and the
forest floor. Flowering trees
and shrubs such as dogwood
and rhododendron
are also abundant. Because
of its lush vegetation, the
northwestern coniferous
forest is sometimes called a
"temperate rain forest.."



• Abiotic factors: mild temperatures; abundant precipitation during fall, winter, and spring; relatively cool, dry summer; rocky, acidic soils

• Dominant plants: Douglas fir, Sitka spruce, western hemlock, redwood

• Dominant wildlife: bears; large herbivores such as elk and deer; beavers; predators such as owls, bobcats, and members of the weasel family

• Geographic distribution: Pacific coast of northwestern United States and
Canada, from northern California to Alaska Boreal Forest








Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Freshwater



World Location: Found worldwide



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): Variable depending on location






Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): Flowing or still water, low salinity







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Cattails
Flexible stems withstand water currents.


Water Lilies
Broad leaves float on the water surface for sunlight.


Duckweed
Small, floating plants absorb nutrients from water.


Algae
Grow submerged and photosynthesis underwater.


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Frogs
Webbed feet aid in swimming.


Beavers
Build dams to create stable habitats


Trout
Streamlined bodies navigate currents.


Turtles
Hard shells protect against predators.







Boreal Forest

Along the northern edge of
the temperate zone are
dense evergreen forests of
coniferous trees. These
biomes are called boreal
forests, or taiga (TY-guh).
Winters are bitterly cold,
but summers are mild and
long enough to allow the
ground to thaw. The word
boreal comes from the
Greek word for "north,"
reflecting the fact that
boreal forests occur mostly
in the Northern
Hemisphere.






• Abiotic factors: long, cold winters; short, mild summers; moderate precipitation; high humidity; acidic, nutrient-poor soils

• Dominant plants: needle-leaf coniferous trees such as spruce and fir; some broadleaf deciduous trees; small, berry-bearing shrubs

• Dominant wildlife: predators like lynx and timber-wolves and members of the weasel family; small herbivorous mammals; moose and other large herbivores; beavers; songbirds and migratory birds

• Geographic distribution: North America, Asia, and northern Europe







Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Oceans



World Location: Covers 70% of Earth’s surface



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): The average temperature ranges from -2°C in polar regions to 30°C in tropical areas. Polar regions experience seasonal ice coverage, while tropical areas stay warm throughout the year. Coastal areas receive more precipitation, whereas open ocean regions receive less.
 





Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): The salinity of the ocean averages around 35 parts per thousand. Oceans are divided into depth zones, including the sunlit photic zone, the twilight zone, and the dark abyssal zone. Ocean currents regulate global climate, while tides influence coastal ecosystems.







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Kelp
Flexible stems resist ocean currents.


Seagrass
Anchors in sandy ocean beds and tolerates saltwater.


Coral
Forms symbiotic relationships with algae.


Phytoplankton
Float to stay in sunlight for photosynthesis.


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Dolphins
Streamlined bodies for efficient swimming.


Sharks
Sharp teeth and sensory organs for hunting.


Sea Turtles
Flippers adapted for swimming long distances.


Octopus
Camouflage and flexible body to escape predators.






Tundra

The tundra is characterized
by permafrost, a layer of
permanently frozen subsoil.
During the short, cool
summer, the ground thaws
to a depth of a few centimeters
and becomes
soggy and wet. In winter,
the topsoil freezes again.
This cycle of thawing and
freezing, which rips and
crushes plant roots, is one
reason that tundra plants
are small and stunted. Cold
temperatures, high winds;
the short growing season,
and humus-poor soils also
limit plant height




• Abiotic factors: strong winds; low precipitation; short and soggy summers; long, cold, and dark winters; poorly developed soils; permafrost

• Dominant plants: ground-hugging plants such as mosses, lichens, sedges, and short grasses

• Dominant wildlife: a few resident birds and mammals that can withstand the harsh conditions; migratory waterfowl, shore birds, musk ox, Arctic foxes, and caribou; lemmings and other small rodents

• Geographic distribution: northern North America, Asia, and Europe








Biome Worksheet

Biome Name: Chaparral
 


World Location: Found in small regions on every continent, including California, the Mediterranean Basin, parts of Australia, and South Africa.



Climate (Average Annual Temperature, Seasonal Temperatures, and Precipitation): The chaparral biome has hot, dry summers with temperatures averaging around 30°C and mild, wet winters with temperatures around 10°C. It receives 25-50 cm of rainfall annually, mostly during the winter.
 





Other Environmental Factors (soil, tides, salinity, etc.): The soil is rocky and nutrient-poor, making it difficult for plants to grow. Wildfires are common during the dry summer months, and plants must be drought-resistant.







Plants:
Adaptations to Environment:
Manzanita
Thick bark and deep roots to survive drought and fires.


Olive Tree
Waxy leaves conserve water.


Sagebrush
Aromatic oils deter herbivores.


Cactus
Stores water and has spines for protection.


Animals:
Adaptations to Environment:
Coyotes
Adaptable diet and nocturnal habits to avoid heat.


Roadrunner
Fast runner to evade predators in open terrain.


Jackrabbit
Large ears dissipate heat.


Lizards
Scaly skin prevents water loss.




